# SSAsimpleJ
Model for 1D marine ice sheet evolution (SSA approximation) in Julia, using numerical approach from [Schoof 2007](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1029/2006JF000664%4010.1002/%28ISSN%292169-9011.TIDEWATER1) 

This model is a 1D flowline of ice sheet flow, where equations for ice velocity, ice thickness, and grounding line position are simultaneously solved using an implicit discretization in time and a finite difference scheme in space. All variables are scaled in space so that the grounding line is always at a node, and to ensure high resolution near the grounding line for an accurate solution. The spatial domain is further subdivided into a coarse grid upstream of the grounding line and a refined grid near the grounding line. This numerical scheme has been benchmarked against the asymtpotic grounding line flux formulate in [Schoof 2007](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1029/2006JF000664%4010.1002/%28ISSN%292169-9011.TIDEWATER1) and converges well in resolution.

This scheme can be set to transient or steady-state mode, where the solver solves for ice sheet evolution in time (transient) or the nearest steady-state of the system. Please be aware though, that the steady-state mode requires an initial guess for the solution, and for strongly nonlinear or non-smooth systems will have difficulty converging on a solution.

The "J in the repository name stands for Julia. The script is completely self-contained, though it requires the ForwardDiff and NLSolve packages (c. 2020). To find the solution of the system of equations, this script uses [NLSolve](https://github.com/JuliaNLSolvers/NLsolve.jl), the most common solver for nonlinear systems of equations used in the Julia community. It also uses [ForwardDiff](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ForwardDiff.jl) to calculate the analytical Jacobian of the system of equations used automated differentiation. This implementation is ~4x faster than the numerical version in [SSAsimpleM](https://github.com/aarobel/SSAsimpleM). Both SSAsimpleM and SSAsimpleJ use the same discretization scheme, however.
